So there's one other interesting
thing going on here.
Fact came from way up here.
And inside of my function
I was able to name fact,
talk about fact use fact as a value.
Even though it wasn't really something
like local to this function,
it was something earlier in my program.
So what is going on there and
that is the next thing we're
gonna talk about,
which is scope of variables.
Because in our JavaScript programs,
there are so many variables in play.
And scope is a concept in
programming languages generally but
in JavaScript specifically,
that reflects the fact that
it doesn't just matter
which variables we declare.
It also matters where we declare them and
where we're trying to use them.
So in other words, scope is kind of a
general concept that determines where and
when variables are in play meaning
like valid references that I can use.
So basically when can I access
that variable by its name and
what is it gonna point to,
what is in play here?
So scope is something that we just
need to spend a moment talking about,
because it sometimes results in some
surprising things in our programs.
And it's important as we go on
in our JavaScript journeys for
us to develop a intuition and a solid
foundation of how JavaScript does scope.
And where our variables
are gonna be usable,
depending on where we declare them.
So let's take a look at this example.
I have a function called
declare bankruptcy,
if we think back to our
Michael Scott Gif from earlier.
Where I'm declaring
the variable bankruptcy and
I am declaring that variable and
assigning it to a value of true.
Within the body,
which is what we call the stuff
in curly braces the corpulent
functionality of the function.
So within the body of the function inside
of those curly braces I am declaring
a variable bankruptcy and
I am setting its value to true.
The question is, what do you think is
gonna happen when then I call declare
bankruptcy and then on the following line,
I log the value of bankruptcy.
Any guesses what is gonna happen?
>> It probably is gonna
say it's undefined.
>> Maybe it'll say it's undefined.
Let's check it out.
All right, so let's check it out.
We're gonna take this code,
we're gonna go over to our console.
We're gonna run it line by line, so
we've got our function declarebankruptcy,
okay, cool.
Now I'm gonna call that function, cool.
And it didn't return anything but
we expect that because we
didn't have a return statement.
And now the question is,
what is bankruptcy?
And not only did we get undefined,
we even got a an error that bankruptcy
has not even been declared yet.
It's not even a thing,
it's not even a variable that
points to undefined,
it's a reference error.
JavaScript says, I don't even know
what word you're saying right now,
I can't even understand you,
so what is happening?
Essentially, in JavaScript we
have a concept of nested scopes
where we can think of scopes as
sort of like a playing field where
we can declare variables and
then access them.
And we can talk about scopes as
being wider or narrower in scope,
so meaning kind of like a view
you could have on the world.
You can see more things or
you can see fewer things.
And in JavaScript,
each time that we write a function,
each time we declare a function,
Inside of the body of that function,
is its own new scope.
And that scope is different than the
default scope of that we've been using so
far, where we write everything on
the same level in the program,
which is what's called the global scope.
Well, let's take a look at another example
and then we'll go to the whiteboard.
In this example,
I have a declaration of a variable called
planet that I'm assigning
to the string Jupiter.
Then I'm declaring a function,
that I'll just call scope out that
has another declaration of a variable
planet with a different value, Mars.
Now if I log within space out and
I'm gonna use the phrase inner
planet to describe the value that
I'm login within that scope.
When I use the name planet,
when I refer to planet,
what do you think it's gonna refer to?
>> Mars.
>> Mars,
then when I call that function, and
outside of that function,
log the outer planet,
guess what planets gonna refer to?
>> Jupiter.
>> Jupiter, let's check it out.
Okay, so first I'm gonna
declare my planet variable.
And as we might expect before I do
anything else, planet is Jupiter.
Now I'm gonna declare my function.
And nothing has happened yet
because I've just declared the function,
I haven't run it, I haven't called it.
So let's call it.
And once I call this function,
JavaScript is gonna start running
the code inside of the function.
So it's gonna run the line that says left
planet equals Mars, and then it's gonna
run the line console.log("Inner planet:",
let's see what happens.
Okay, so it printed out inner
planet: Mars, makes sense,
because it's inside of the asteroid belt,
okay.
Now, if I console.log( outside
of the function, outer planet.
Now, when it says planet it's
referring back to the planet
that I had defined outside
of the function Jupiter.
So let's take a look on
Whiteboard what's happening here.
So what we've been saying so
far is we've been talking
about variables as being
all in this one big space.
But really, I've been sort of glossing
over the fact that when we declare
these variables, we are declaring them
within a space that we could call global,
so we could say this is global variables.
And here, when I say let planet equals
Jupiter I have a new variable planet and
then somewhere over here in In value
land I have a string called Jupiter.
And I am making a link
an arrow from my global
variable planet to the value Jupiter.
Now the thing is when I
declare a function I sort of
get a new scope that's
narrower than the old one.
And this is what did I call this scope
out, I think was the name of the function.
And because we declared that function,
we actually get a global variable called
scope out, that points to the function.
And then within scope out,
we have another variable planet,
where somewhere out there we
have a string called Mars,
And we are associating
that planet with Mars.
So when I asked JavaScript for planet
inside the body of the scope out function,
JavaScript is looking for
a variable within that scope.
And it says I found planet and it follows
the link and it finds the value Mars.
But when after I'm done
running that function,
I asked JavaScript to console log
planet from the global context
from the overall context,
the widest context possible.
It's looking for a variable called planet,
it's finding planet in the global scope,
which is where I'm in now because
I'm done with the function,
following the link and
finding the value Jupiter.
Okay, so let's talk about what happened
in our earlier example with bankruptcy.
So I had a global scope,
and in that scope,
I declared a function bankruptcy.
Or sorry,
it was called declare bankruptcy, right,
was the name of the function.
[LAUGH] See, it's a hard word to spell.
And that created its new scope
with the function body there,
so this is the declare bankruptcy scope.
And within that,
I said let bankruptcy equal true, I think.
So here,
I created the bankruptcy variable.
I had a value out here somewhere called
true and I said hey JavaScript point
to the value true, from the variable
bankruptcy within this scope.
But then later after I was done
running the function when I was out
here somewhere I said,
hey JavaScript, what is bankruptcy?
And JavaScript looked in its scope where
I'm asking it, in the global scope,
it looked for
a variable called bankruptcy, and
unlike in our planet example,
we don't have one.
We don't have anything called
bankruptcy in the global scope.
And it can't see into the inner scope
of the declare bankruptcy function,
so it says error, I do not have
a variable called bankruptcy.
I don't know what you're
talking about Anjana,
stop doing nonsense things in your code.
So this is kind of an important
thing about scope,
is that it really matters where
we have those declarations.
And if we have multiple similar
declarations, the values that they refer
to might be different, like we saw
on our Mars and Jupiter example.
This is a tricky thing to wrap your head
around for the first time so if this
is like, don't worry about it, we're
gonna keep talking through some examples.
>> Could you force that variable
planet to be a global variable within
the function itself or no?
>> Can you force the variable to be
a global within the function, okay.
So just a recap of what we just said,
basically within each scope
which they're nested, right.
So we have the global scope that we
land in, then we have a new scope for
every function.
Within each scope that we're in, and
we can even have like
functions within functions.
So we can even have like Russian
doll scopes happening here,
we're not gonna get that far but
that's for later steps with JavaScript.
But within a scope you cannot see any
inner scopes like you can imagine
them wrapped up in a little privacy
film and like tinted windows.
So that you can't see into
them from the outside, So
our function scope has
tinted windows on it.
From the global context, we can't see in,
but from a narrower scope, we can see out.
So, just with tinted windows in your limo,
that you're surely gonna
be driving in once you've,
started the next billion dollar
company with your JavaScript skills.
You can see out from the function
scope into the wider global scope.
So we can see other things like
in our is correct function,
we could see our fact object.
That was a variable declared
outside of the function.
So we can think of these scopes as sort
of having tinted windows on them, okay.
So this is just an example highlighting
something similar to what we did in our
is correct function, here we have a global
variable declared in the global scope,
to a string that describes what it is.
Then we have a function narrower scope,
which just is there to
create the narrower scope, we can log
the global variable from in here.
Let's prove it.
Okay, so I have my global variable,
boom global variable, is there.
Okay, great.
Now I'm gonna declare my
function now our scope,
nothing happened because
I haven't run it yet.
So now let's run it and if we can see out
of our tinted windows then we should be
able to see the global variable and
log its value.
And we gonna declare a local variable.
So we saw I live in global scope so yes we
were able to see out the tinted windows.
But now if I tried to log the local
variable we get the same thing we saw
before with bankruptcy we get this
reference error because we can't see into
the limo.